Add documentation for UV (#596)
watertap-org/watertap: docs/technical_reference/unit_models/uv_aop.rst

1) UV light and hydrogen peroxide (:math:`\text{H}_2\text{O}_2`)

2) UV light and ozone (:math:`\text{O}_3`)

3) UV light, hydrogen peroxide (:math:`\text{H}_2\text{O}_2`) and ozone (:math:`\text{O}_3`)

UV AOPs can be  modeled at several different levels, depending on the known kinetic pathways and the modeling objectives. In this work, a basic level kinetic model is presented with an assumption on pseudo-steady state approximation for the kinetic description of free radical species. A pseudo-first order rate constant is utilized to represent the overall degradation rate of contaminants. The users need to provide either UV dose and disinfection rate, or rate constant and exposure time that are can be acquired during UV validation tests. These measurements are then used to simulate the removal of contaminants during the UV AOP process.

This model also accounts for the energy demand for the disinfection process. The users need to provide Electrical Efficiency per Log Order Reduction (EE/O) to evaluate energy costs.

Ports
-----

> The model provides two ports (Pyomo notation in parentheses):

Reviewer: Would it be helpful to include how you closed the mass balance for a 2-port initial model here? Does the user need to provide an extra degraded component or are there assumptions being made on how the UV 'inactivates' the contaminant?

Author: The mass balance for a single input single output unit is simply out = in - loss, similar to `coag_floc_model.rst`. From the paper I reviewed, the UV systems neglect the degraded components and the user also does not need to provide them. I think one reason is that the contaminant concentration handled by UV system is already very low (1e-9 kg/L) from the inlet, and the degraded components have minimal impacts on the water quality. And the degraded components will have a variety of reactions, which depends on the components and can be very challenging to track.

* Inlet port (inlet)
* Outlet port (outlet)

Sets
----
.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Indices"

   "Time", ":math:`t`", "[0]"
   "Phases", ":math:`p`", "['Liq']"

>    "Components", ":math:`j`", "['H2O', 'NDMA', ...]"

Reviewer: Can the solutes be generalized here, as the model is applicable to any contaminants the user may provide?
See Nanofiltration (ZO) as an example

Author: The NDMA property package only has one solute component, but the model is applicable if the user choose other property packages with more contaminants.

Degrees of Freedom and Variables
--------------------------------
Aside from the inlet feed state variables (i.e., temperature, pressure, component mass flowrates),
the UV AOP model has at least an additional 5 degrees of freedom that
the user must specify. The table below gives an outline of these.

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Index", "Units"

   "Inlet temperature", ":math:`T`", "temperature", "[t]", ":math:`\text{K}`"
   "Inlet pressure", ":math:`P_{in}`", "pressure", "[t]", ":math:`\text{Pa}`"
   "Outlet pressure", ":math:`P_{out}`", "pressure", "[t]", ":math:`\text{Pa}`"
   "Mass flowrate of components", ":math:`M_j`", "flow_mass_phase_comp", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{kg/s}`"
   "Inlet volumetric flowrate", ":math:`F_{in}`", "flow_vol", "[t]", ":math:`\text{m}^3\text{/s}`"

>    "Inactivation rate coefficient", ":math:`k`", "inactivation_rate", "['Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{m}^2\text{/J}`"

Reviewer: When stating that the DOF is 5 after specifying the inlet state, is it correct only the variables starting at Inactivation rate coefficient and below would contribute to these 5 as the ones above it are all coupled to the inlet state? It may be worth separating these tables since the first 5 are based on state properties and the following 8 are the true DOF of the model, where 5 of 8 must be fixed. Assuming I am interpreting the model correctly.

Reviewer: Do outlet pressure and flow_vol not also come from the property package when referring to the footnote?

Reviewer 2: I agree- have a look at some of the older documentation for RO and how we mention the need to fix inlet feed conditions but focus explicitly on the unit model variables that must be fixed. Then you can revise this accordingly.

Author: You are correct that the variables after inactivation rate are the 5 additional DOF. I followed the `coag_floc_model.rst` which is also a single input single output model for the documentation. I think the note has already explained those first variables belong to the property package, similar to the `coag_floc_model.rst`.
As you suggested, I added `flow_vol` in the notes, and both inlet and outlet pressure has the same notation `pressure`.

Author: Al right, I separated the table.

   "Exposure time of UV light", ":math:`t`", "exposure_time", None, ":math:`\text{s}`"
   "Electricity demand of components", ":math:`E_j`", "electricity_demand_phase_comp", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{W}`"
   "Electricity efficiency per log order reduction (EE/O)", ":math:`EE/O_j`", "electrical_efficiency", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^3`"
   "Lamp efficiency", ":math:`\eta`", "lamp_efficiency", None, None

**Users must provide values for and 'fix' these variables to solve the model with DOF=0. However, users may also leave variables unfixed for optimization purposes.**

**NOTE: Variables for 'temperature', 'pressure', and 'flow_mass_phase_comp' come from the associated property package as state variables and are accessed via {port_name}.{state_var_name}**

Equations and Relationships
---------------------------

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

   "UV dose", ":math:`D = I \cdot t`"
   "Pseudo-first order rate constant", ":math:`k_0 = I \cdot k`"
   "Solvent mass balance", ":math:`M_{\text{H2O},out} = M_{\text{H2O},in}`"
   "Solute mass balance", ":math:`M_{j,out} = M_{j,in} \cdot \exp(D \cdot k)`"

>    "Electricity demand", ":math:`E_j = EE/O_j \cdot F_{in} \cdot \log(M_{j,in} / M_{j,out}) / \eta`"

Reviewer: log_10() or ln()?

Author: It is log_10().

Reviewer 2: It might be nice to explicitly write this as log_10 then.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe it would be best to include the Class Documentation block of code here, find an example in the Reverse Osmosis (0D) page. As a standalone documentation, I am confused on whether this applies to both the UV and UV-AOP models in WaterTAP and this code block can insert an automated link to the model class that you are describing.

Reviewer: Looks like yours is listed as `watertap.unit_models.zero_order.uv_zo` and `watertap.unit_models.zero_order.uv_aop_zo` so add whichever (or both) this documentation is referencing

Reviewer: Suggesting this as the link didn't generate in the most recent commit, 2948a1b

Author: Yeah, I've aded the Class Documentation block as you suggested.

Reviewer: Excuse me, maybe it should be `watertap.unit_models.ultraviolet`. It should be linking to the "watertap.unit_models package" page when linked properly. I believe its dot notation based on the name of the .py file in the unit_models folder.

Author: @hunterbarber No worry, I did add `watertap.unit_models.uv_aop`, it should be correct. The uv_zo and uv_aop_zo are previous WaterTAP3 models.

Reviewer: Ah, I see the most recent PR now, sorry! Should be good after both PRs get merged.

   "Time", ":math:`t`", "[0]"
   "Phases", ":math:`p`", "['Liq']"
   "Components", ":math:`j`", "['H2O', 'NDMA', ...]"

Degrees of Freedom and Variables
--------------------------------
The UV system includes the state variables from the associated property package, and an outline of these variables are listed below:

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Index", "Units"

   "Inlet temperature", ":math:`T`", "temperature", "[t]", ":math:`\text{K}`"
   "Inlet pressure", ":math:`P_{in}`", "pressure", "[t]", ":math:`\text{Pa}`"
   "Outlet pressure", ":math:`P_{out}`", "pressure", "[t]", ":math:`\text{Pa}`"
   "Mass flowrate of components", ":math:`M_j`", "flow_mass_phase_comp", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{kg/s}`"
   "Inlet volumetric flowrate", ":math:`F_{in}`", "flow_vol", "[t]", ":math:`\text{m}^3\text{/s}`"

**NOTE: Variables for 'temperature', 'pressure', 'flow_mass_phase_comp', and 'flow_vol' come from the associated property package as state variables and are accessed via {port_name}.{state_var_name}**

Aside from the inlet feed state variables (i.e., temperature, pressure, component mass flowrates),

> the UV AOP model has at least an additional 5 degrees of freedom that

Reviewer 2: This implies that the user must fix 5 variables, but the table lists more than 5. So if a user follows these instructions, wouldn't they overspecify the problem?

Also, above you mention "users need to provide either UV dose and disinfection rate, or rate constant and exposure time that are can be acquired during UV validation tests." While there can be different combinations of which DOF to fix, maybe we should provide a list of the typical variables to fix for a simulation.

Author: I've specified which variable should be fixed from the list in the note of new version.

the user must specify. The table below gives an outline of these.

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Index", "Units"

   "Inactivation rate coefficient", ":math:`k`", "inactivation_rate", "['Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{m}^2\text{/J}`"
   "Pseudo-first order rate constant", ":math:`k_0`", "rate_constant", "['Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{s}^{-1}`"
   "UV dose", ":math:`D`", "uv_dose", None, ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^2`"
   "Average intensity of UV light", ":math:`I`", "uv_intensity", None, ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^2\text{/s}`"
   "Exposure time of UV light", ":math:`t`", "exposure_time", None, ":math:`\text{s}`"
   "Electricity demand of components", ":math:`E_j`", "electricity_demand_phase_comp", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{W}`"
   "Electricity efficiency per log order reduction (EE/O)", ":math:`EE/O_j`", "electrical_efficiency", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^3`"

>    "Lamp efficiency", ":math:`\eta`", "lamp_efficiency", None, None

Reviewer 2: I know we are saying this implementation can be representative of UV-AOP, but I realized that we don't account for any addition of a chemical (oxidant) dose. Is this something that would be excluded from the model (for now) but accounted for in costing?

Author: The energy cost associated with AOP should be accounted for by the EE/O. That is to say, users can provide EE/O with respect to pure UV or UV-AOP technologies, then the electricity demand can be evaluated. The effect of H2O2 has been accounted for in the model, in the PR https://github.com/watertap-org/watertap/pull/600, I added another reaction rate constant to represent indirect photolysis process. You are correct we did need a oxident concentration information for costing chemical dose.

Reviewer 2: In other words, specifying a chemical dosage would never directly affect the predicted performance of the model but would only be relevant for costing, correct? The performance (constituent removal) is dictated by the reaction rate constant which would be derived from fitted experimental data in theory.

Author: The chemical dosage can affect the reaction rate coefficient, it can be further expressed as a oxidation rate constant and steady state hydrogen peroxide concentration, but I haven't included the kinectics because it is tricky (reaction involved) and we lack parameter information.

Reviewer 2: OK, that's what I thought. Thanks for verifying!

**NOTE: Variables for 'temperature', 'pressure', 'flow_mass_phase_comp', and 'flow_vol' come from the associated property package as state variables and are accessed via {port_name}.{state_var_name}**

Aside from the inlet feed state variables (i.e., temperature, pressure, component mass flowrates),
the UV AOP model has at least an additional 5 degrees of freedom that
the user must specify. The table below gives an outline of these.

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Index", "Units"

   "Inactivation rate coefficient", ":math:`k`", "inactivation_rate", "['Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{m}^2\text{/J}`"
   "Pseudo-first order rate constant", ":math:`k_0`", "rate_constant", "['Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{s}^{-1}`"
   "UV dose", ":math:`D`", "uv_dose", None, ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^2`"
   "Average intensity of UV light", ":math:`I`", "uv_intensity", None, ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^2\text{/s}`"
   "Exposure time of UV light", ":math:`t`", "exposure_time", None, ":math:`\text{s}`"
   "Electricity demand of components", ":math:`E_j`", "electricity_demand_phase_comp", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{W}`"

>    "Electricity efficiency per log order reduction (EE/O)", ":math:`EE/O_j`", "electrical_efficiency", "[t, 'Liq', j]", ":math:`\text{J/}\text{m}^3`"

Reviewer 2: @luohezhiming  Just noticed that the variable name `electrical_efficiency` should be named `electrical_efficiency_phase_comp` if indexed by phase and component. 

Let's just make sure this matches what's in the merged version of the unit model for now. 

After your other PR on UV goes through, you can also update this doc as needed.

Author: In the merged version, the variable is named `electrical_efficiency`,  but I could rename it to `electrical_efficiency_phase_comp` in PR #600

   "Lamp efficiency", ":math:`\eta`", "lamp_efficiency", None, None

> **Users must provide values for and 'fix' these variables to solve the model with DOF=0. Thus, users should fix
> one variable of 'inactivation_rate' and 'rate_constant', two variables of 'uv_dose', 'uv_intensity' and 'exposure_time',
> one variable of 'electricity_demand_phase_comp' and 'electrical_efficiency', and one variable of 'lamp_efficiency'.
> However, users may also leave variables unfixed for optimization purposes.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Users must provide values for and 'fix' certain variables to solve the model with DOF=0. Thus, users should fix
    * either 'inactivation_rate' and 'rate_constant',

    * two variables out of 'uv_dose', 'uv_intensity' and 'exposure_time',
    * either 'electricity_demand_phase_comp' and 'electrical_efficiency', 

    * and 'lamp_efficiency'.

However, users may later unfix certain variables for optimization purposes.**
```
